Popular Music
http://journals.cambridge.org/PMU
Additional services for Popular Music:
Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here

‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei as
transnational soundscape
Martin Roberts
Popular Music / Volume 32 / Special Issue 01 / January 2013, pp 111 - 123
DOI: 10.1017/S026114301200058X, Published online: 06 February 2013

Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S026114301200058X
How to cite this article:
Martin Roberts (2013). ‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei as transnational
soundscape. Popular Music, 32, pp 111-123 doi:10.1017/S026114301200058X
Request Permissions : Click here

Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/PMU, IP address: 27.24.158.151 on 11 Dec 2013

Popular Music (2013) Volume 32/1. © Cambridge University Press 2013, pp. 111–123
doi:10.1017/S026114301200058X

‘A new stereophonic sound
spectacular’: Shibuya-kei as
transnational soundscape
MARTIN ROBERTS
School of Communications, Hallym University, Chuncheon, South Korea
E-mail: mroberts@tokyobossa.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on Shibuya-kei, a style of independent popular music that emerged in Japan in the
late 1980s and which has been influential in the popularisation of J-pop worldwide. Although
usually treated as a uniquely Japanese musical genre, Shibuya-kei was from its inception defined
by an ostentatious internationalism, fusing jazz, easy listening and bossa nova with British,
American and French retro-pop styles. Tracing the international itineraries of Shibuya-kei musicians
and the role of Western musicians and labels in promoting it outside Japan, this paper characterises
Shibuya-kei not as just another J-pop genre but as a transnational soundscape, a collaborative project
produced by a network of musicians circulating between Japan and the UK, the US, France,
Germany, Spain and Brazil. As such, the paper suggests, it requires us to rethink the place of the
national in relation to popular music.

In the Japanese popular music industry, where new musical varieties bloom and fade
at the speed of a time-lapse movie, the style known as Shibuya-kei has proved surprisingly durable. Having originated in the late 1980s as a loose-knit network of independent musicians, DJs and labels producing popular music different from that
distributed by the major labels, it today occupies a popular stylistic niche within
that mainstream, and its founding members are revered and influential figures
within the industry at large. Shibuya-kei was also arguably the first form of
Japanese pop to gain wide international attention: while certain Japanese underground music genres and artists have enjoyed a cult following among Western avantgarde musicians for decades, Shibuya-kei artists have played a key role in the developing interest in Japanese popular music among youth in the US and Europe. In
addition to a steady stream of compilations and remix releases, the style continues
to develop and mutate through pastiche and the stylistic tweakings of a new generation of neo-Shibuya artists.
I am interested in Shibuya-kei for a number of reasons. First, as a case study in
subcultural music scenes and the operations of what I call the subculture industry:
however mainstream and commercialised it may now have become, at its inception
at least, Shibuya-kei could be seen as a subcultural scene in that it defined itself
aesthetically against the more mainstream forms of Japanese pop music being
released by the major labels. Secondly, as a site for considering the increasing convergence between the subcultural and the transcultural in a globalised world: that is, the
111
http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

112

Martin Roberts

articulation of oppositional identities at the local level through identification with
and the reproduction of symbolic practices and production originating in cultures
other than one’s own. While such transcultural practices may in some cases be considered ‘already’ subcultural in origin (e.g. graffiti writing, goth music), what is subcultural in one context need not be so in another, as the cult fandom among
Euro-American youth for Japanese manga and anime attests. Similarly, while styles
of Japanese popular music such as Shibuya-kei (or more recently Visual-kei) may
have developed a cult following among Western youth, they are much closer to
the commercial mainstream in Japan, and their appeal is in part related to their perceived exoticism in the mainstream Western pop, rock or hip-hop context.
Thirdly, I am interested in how Shibuya-kei complicates the place of the
national as a reference point in popular music. Although in the West Shibuya-kei
is invariably treated as a Japanese genre or scene, in Japan it was most often noted
for its ostentatious internationalism; it defined itself against the musical mainstream
of its time through an affiliation with certain subcultural genres of Western popular
music and other media.1 In this paper, I aim to dis-locate Shibuya-kei from the local
frame of reference within which it is usually discussed and, in a sense, to deterritorialise it. I propose that Shibuya-kei is more productively seen as a transnational
soundscape, an ongoing international co-production involving both Japanese and
non-Japanese musics and musicians.2 Shibuya-kei originated in Japan but, as we
will see, it was from its inception predicated on its eclectic appropriation and transculturation of a variety of Western and other popular musics which were already in
transnational circulation; it has over the past decade emerged as an autonomous,
hybridised soundscape in its own right, to the extent that today it constitutes what
in another context Josh Kun (2005) calls an audiotopia, simultaneously everywhere
and nowhere in particular. In addition to its spatial diffusion, the concept of utopia
inscribed within the term audiotopia is particularly appropriate for what might be
called the affective register of Shibuya-kei more generally. Before moving to these
broader aspects, however, let us begin by considering Shibuya-kei within the local
geographical and historical context from which it bloomed.

Retromania
The avant-garde has become an arrière-garde.
(Simon Reynolds, 2011: Retromania, p. xx)

Shibuya-kei emerged from the rich culture of music collecting and consumption
which had established itself by the late 1980s in the fashionable Shibuya shopping
district of south-west Tokyo. At the beginning of the 1990s, the opening of the
HMV and Tower Records flagship stores, in addition to others such as Wave and
Shinseido, created what David Marx calls an ‘ecosystem’ of record stores which provided outlets not just for Japanese but also for imported foreign music.3 As Marx
recounts (2010), the term ‘Shibuya-kei’ itself began to be applied to a select group
of Japanese indie bands, including Flipper’s Guitar, Pizzicato Five, and Love
Tambourines, among others, which were promoted at the newly opened HMV
store as being more interesting than the familiar Japanese-language clones of
Western pop genres, and which derived the bulk of their sales from the record stores
in the Shibuya district.4 It is no coincidence that two of the figures regarded as most

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei

113

influential in Shibuya-kei’s emergence, Konishi Yasuharu and Oyamada Keigo, were
avid music collectors. As Marx explains:
Shibuya-kei did not just glorify shopping and products in the lyrics – the entire base of the
music itself relied on sampling or pastiche of pre-existing media. Konishi Yasuharu of
Pizzicato Five was a record collector first and a musician second. Like the DJ Shadow
school of hip hop, Shibuya-kei was about finding and buying the most obscure (and
therefore, best) records and reintroducing them to the world. Beikoku Ongaku’s
editor-in-chief Kawasaki Daisuke sees Shibuya-kei as just the ’90s progression of rich, urban
youth consumer culture, and indeed all our innovators of the scene fit the Hosono Haruomi
upper middle class model. Oyamada and [Kenji] Ozawa [Flipper’s Guitar’s second member]
. . . went to top-tier private high schools. Supposedly, Konishi was supported by his parents
until he turned 30 and spent all of their hard earned money on records. Accordingly,
Shibuya-kei has no explicit political message other than delineating the creator and listener
from mainstream culture through product choices and taste. . . . Shibuya-kei exclaimed, you
are all consuming the wrong goods! And their fans, who were also upper middle class
educated kids, agreed. The market responded by providing those more sophisticated goods
and incorporating them into the mainstream ‘middle class’ lifestyle. (Marx 2004)

Konishi’s band Pizzicato Five, fronted by the glamorous Nomiya Maki, was to
become perhaps the most iconic example of what Shibuya-kei was about. Yet in a
very different way, Oyamada’s band Flipper’s Guitar are also regarded as one of
the pioneers of the Shibuya-kei sound, with Oyamada himself subsequently becoming one of its central figures under the moniker Cornelius – a name inspired, in a
typical piece of pop-culture eclecticism, by the central character of the 1960s
American science fiction movie classic Planet of the Apes. Both bands were characterised in different ways by an eclectic internationalism: while Pizzicato Five was a postmodern mélange of jazz, easy listening, Motown, disco and club music, Flipper’s
Guitar was heavily indebted to more recent British indie-pop and the
neo-psychedelia of The Stone Roses and The Happy Mondays. The indie labels
founded by Konishi and Oyamada, Readymade and Trattoria, along with others
such as Crue-L and Escalator, became the distribution platform for the bands and
solo artists who were or became part of the Shibuya-kei scene, including Love
Tambourines, Kahimi Karie, Takako Minegawa, Yukari Fresh, Bridge, and numerous
others. While Shibuya-kei was primarily a Tokyo-based scene, it also had affinities
with the Kyoto-based acid-jazz scene through DJs such as Tanaka Tomoyuki
(Fantastic Plastic Machine) and Kyoto Jazz Massive.
If there were one characteristic the diverse group of artists gathered under the
Shibuya-kei umbrella shared, in accordance with larger cultural developments
within 1980s Japan, it was an ostentatious internationalism.5 While Japanese bands
had been known for their imitation of Western bands and popular music genres
since at least the 1960s, what differentiated the Shibuya-kei bands were their references not just to contemporary but to retro popular music genres, including 1960s
French and British pop, Brazilian bossa nova, easy listening and exotica, European
movie soundtracks, Motown, disco and 1980s UK indie-pop – a phenomenon
which Simon Reynolds recently dubbed ‘retromania’.6 The references in question
were not limited to music alone, but also extended to the styling of bands and artists
in album art, promotional media, photoshoots for magazine articles, music videos
and live performances. An early photograph of Pizzicato Five (1985) poses the
band against the background of a movie poster for Jacques Tati’s film Mon Oncle
(1958), purchased by Konishi Yasuharu while on a trip to Paris. The band’s first

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

114

Martin Roberts

single, produced by Hosono Haruomi and released in the same year, bore the English
title ‘Audrey Hepburn Complex’. The French nouvelle vague, the Italian glamour of
Fellini’s La Dolce Vita (1960), the Swinging London of Antonioni’s Blow-up (1966),
or the 1960s French musicals of Jacques Demy and Michel Legrand are variously
invoked in Pizzicato Five music videos, Nomiya Maki’s reincarnations of 1960s
fashion icons Twiggy and Veruschka, or Kahimi Karie’s EP Giapponese a Roma.
Much could be written about Shibuya-kei’s French connection, from the ubiquitous
French-language samples of Shibuya-kei songs to actual collaborations with French
artists such as Philippe Auclair (of whom more later), Raphael Sebbag (of acid-jazz
unit United Future Organisation) or producer Bertrand Burgalat. Kahimi Karie
lived in Paris for a number of years and self-consciously styled herself after 1960s
chanteuses such as France Gall or Claudine Longet.
The notion of ‘internationalism’ requires some clarification in this context. The
Shibuya-kei artists were of course not alone in their fascination with easy listening
and other retro genres; indeed, it was in many ways symptomatic of the larger tendencies in Euro-American music culture of their time, which also involved a postmodern (often camp) nostalgia for retro genres such as exotica and the pastiches and
remixes of these which became known as ‘lounge music’. From this perspective,
Shibuya-kei’s internationalism, rather than a direct or ‘vertical’ reference to
Euro-American retro genres, can also be seen as a Japanese response to parallel shifts
taking place contemporaneously (or ‘horizontally’) within the postmodern music culture of the 1990s. The Shibuya-kei sound can thus be seen as tapping into and synthesising a number of highly cosmopolitan music scenes in cities such as London, Paris,
Berlin, New York or Rio. In what follows, I will explain in more detail Shibuya-kei’s
connection to some of these scenes, with the goal of disarticulating it from the local
context within which it has tended to be discussed.

London – Paris
Mike Alway’s diary oh it goes to my head
Mike Alway’s diary la si do re mi
Mike Alway’s diary c’est un secret d’état
Mike Alway’s diary la la . . .
Kahimi Karie, ‘Mike Alway’s Diary’ (1992).
It wouldn’t have lasted three years, except that somehow the Japanese were listening.
Mike Alway on él Records (Svenonius n.d.)

In 1992 Japanese indie label Crue-L Records, founded a year previously by DJ and
producer Takimi Kenji (LN-CC, n.d.), released the first album by a then little-known
singer known as Kahimi Karie (Hiki Mari). Titled Mike Alway’s Diary and produced
by Karie’s boyfriend at the time, Oyamada Keigo, the mini-album included a song of
the same title which was an homage to the founder of the short-lived 1980s British
art-pop indie label él Records, known for its postmodern pastiches of 1960s British
bubblegum pop and the neo-baroque stylisation of its artists after European nobility
(Louis Philippe, The King of Luxembourg).7 As Alway explained in a recent interview, the label’s primary market was not Britain but Japan, with él artists such as
the Would-Be-Goods or Bad Dream Fancy Dress stylised specifically to appeal to
Japanese youth (McNay, I. n.d.). While the British music press remained largely

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei

115

indifferent to él’s releases, they enjoyed a cult following in Japan, even meriting a
Japanese tour by three of the label’s artists organised by Alway in the late 1980s.8
The song ‘Mike Alway’s Diary’ itself, as Alway acknowledges, is essentially a pastiche of the él Records signature sound, originating from his acquaintance with the
Francophile Karie and Oyamada. The song is an indication of the cult status enjoyed
by él Records and its founder in Japanese indie music culture of the time. While it
remains unclear whether the UK label was the inspiration for the similar-sounding
Crue-L Records founded only a few years later, both Kahimi Karie’s early work
and that of other Crue-L artists (such as Love Tambourines) can be attributed to
the British label’s cult following in Japan. It was, indeed, a Japanese funding offer
which persuaded Alway to return to the music industry in 1997 with Songs For
The Jet Set (1997–2000), a neo-él compilation series, after he had abruptly parted company with the label in 1989. Among the innumerable compilations of él Records
artists to have been released over the past decade, one titled simply All About Mike
Alway was released by the Japanese label Rambling Records in 2004.
French musician, arranger, producer, France Football journalist, biographer of
French football legend Eric Cantona, and diehard Arsenal fan Philippe Auclair
(a.k.a. Louis Philippe) has lived in the UK since the 1980s, and along with Simon
Fisher-Turner (a.k.a. The King of Luxembourg) was one of the mainstays of the él
Records catalogue before a later rift with Alway in the 1990s. After the demise of él
Records in 1989 he turned to Japan and found the support of Oyamada Keigo, who
invited him to executive produce one of the earliest releases of Oyamada’s Trattoria
label, the compilation Fab Gear (1991). Mentioned by British expatriate dandy Nick
Currie (a.k.a. Momus) as ‘the founding record, some say, of Shibuya-kei’ (Currie
2008), the compilation includes, in addition to a song co-written by Auclair, four
cuts by él-Records alumni The Monochrome Set and Currie himself (as Momus).
According to the Louis Philippe website, Trattoria’s major-label parent, Polystar, subsequently became Auclair’s ‘second home’, releasing a series of his albums from 1991
to 1998, as well as several compilations, and facilitating licensing deals with labels in
France, Spain, the UK and the US. Trattoria’s catalogue until Cornelius’s Point (2001)
included numerous other Western artists (Apples in Stereo, Le Hammond Inferno).
Based, himself, in Japan, Currie was influential in the Shibuya-kei scene throughout
the 1990s, writing songs and producing records for Kahimi Karie and other artists
(Poison Girl Friend). Given the close involvement of figures such as Alway, Auclair
and Currie with the Shibuya-kei group more or less from its inception, one begins
to see the problems involved in treating it as an exclusively Japanese phenomenon.
While Japanese indie labels Crue-L and Trattoria served as a bridge between
the él Records and Shibuya-kei scenes, outside Japan Shibuya-kei artists were distributed across a network of European and US indie labels and producers, including
Paris (Tricatel), London (Cherry Red), Berlin (Bungalow), New York (Matador),
Chicago (Minty Fresh) and LA (Emperor Norton). Among these, Matador Records
merits particular mention, playing a key role in popularising Pizzicato Five for
American audiences, as well as Germany’s Bungalow Records, whose Sushi 3003
(1996) and Sushi 4004 (1998) compilations also circulated widely throughout
Europe and the US. In their seemingly endless releases of Shibuya-kei labels such
as Escalator and Readymade, these labels connect Japanese Shibuya-kei artists
with larger currents in Western popular music inspired by a similar nostalgia for
1960s retro-pop and exotica, including Paris’s Bertrand Burgalat, LA’s April
March, or European DJs such as Dimitri From Paris and Señor Coconut. Within

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

116

Martin Roberts

this transnational arena, the Japaneseness of Shibuya-kei metamorphoses into a
transnational soundscape, part of a larger mix that includes many of its own sources,
including French retro-pop, the art-pop of él Records, the exotica of Martin Denny
and Arthur Lyman, and Brazilian bossa nova.

New York – Tokyo
‘Shibuya-kei is dead’, declared Nick Currie with characteristic archness in a 1998 column for the Glasgow Herald. Currie’s tongue might have seemed to have been planted
firmly in his cheek: had he not, of all people, recently played a key role in the popularisation of Shibuya-kei in the West as the producer of Paris-based Kahimi Karie’s
first non-Japanese EP (1995)? Had he not also recently collaborated with her in a
series of performances in New York called ‘Portable Shibuya’? Yet Currie’s title
was also, in a sense, correct; his article provided one of the first English-language
introductions to a musical subculture which had been percolating for much of the
past decade, but which within Japan itself was already considered to have passed
its peak by the time Currie introduced it to his Western readers.
Thanks in part to Currie’s promotion of it, over the subsequent decade Shibuya-kei
developed a cult following among American and European youth. Pizzicato Five were
the first to arrive, performing for three years at the New York New Music Seminar
(1992–1994); in his new persona as Cornelius, Oyamada débuted his first domestic
US album release, Fantasma (1998) at the South-by-Southwest Festival in 1998 as part
of his first world tour. Distributed by Matador Records in the US, each artist has reportedly sold over 100,000 records for the label (cited in Marx 2004, part 5). Pizzicato Five’s
Happy Sad EP was featured in Robert Altman’s documentary about Isaac Mizrahi,
Unzipped (1995), and from the mid-1990s onwards their songs became increasingly popular sources for remixes by club DJs in Europe and the US.
Other than Portable Shibuya, Shibuya-kei’s main New York connection was
expatriate Japanese Korean DJ Towa Tei, formerly of the early 1990s band
Deee-Lite, whose acid-jazz début Future Listening! (1994) exhibited the Shibuya-kei
staples of ironic references to 1960s easy listening (starting with its title), sampleheavy dance mixes, and bossa nova, featuring Pizzicato Five vocalist Nomiya
Maki as well as contributions by Arto Lindsay and the then-rising diva of
Brazilian lounge music, Bebel Gilberto. Towa Tei’s extensive remix credits include
a number of Pizzicato Five songs, while the addition of French (or French-accented)
vocalists to his subsequent albums enhanced their overlap with Shibuya-kei’s popcosmopolitanism.9 Also in New York, Cibo Matto, comprising expatriate Japanese
musicians Yuka Honda and Miho Hatori, have often been associated with
Shibuya-kei, although they did not to my knowledge collaborate with Shibuya-kei
musicians, and their 1995 album Viva! La Woman reportedly sold only 20,000 copies
in Japan, compared to 74,000 in the US (Bell 1999).
Over the past decade, the emergence of the Web as a mass medium has played
a key role in the internationalisation of Shibuya-kei: by the late 1990s a network of
Pizzicato Five websites produced by North American and European fans had already
begun to appear, and a Shibuya-kei Yahoo! group was launched in 2000, although
blogs and social networks have since become the preferred sites for fan activity.
Today, music by Shibuya-kei artists is readily available via YouTube, CD mail-order
companies, digital download services and torrent sites.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei

117

Global Shibuya-kei
By 2004, Shibuya-kei fatigue was setting in among some of its Western fans, with
David Marx publishing a series of online articles declaring that Shibuya-kei had run
its course (Marx 2004), and looking to emerging genres such as the electronics-heavy
Akiba-kei or the younger generation exemplified by Tokumaru Shugo as new sources
of subcultural capital. In spite of vanguardist proclamations of its demise, however,
Shibuya-kei has stubbornly refused to go away either in Japan or worldwide. In recent
years, Flipper’s Guitar tributes and Shibuya-kei remixes and retrospectives have begun
to appear with increasing regularity. While Konishi’s latest protégée, Nomoto Karia, or
girl-duo Vanilla Beans exemplify the style in its more commercial form, a new generation of neo-Shibuya-kei bands (Qypthone, Capsule, Dahlia, Elektel, Aprils) continue
to produce music inspired by the Shibuya-kei sound.
As I indicated earlier, the Shibuya-kei artists were certainly not alone in their fascination with 1960s easy listening and other retro-pop and exotic genres, but rather
were symptomatic of a larger, postmodern tendency within popular music that produced similarly retro-inspired bands (often identifiable by their use of the mantra-word
of 1960s musical consumption, stereo: Stereolab, Stereo Total, Apples in Stereo,
Humming Urban Stereo, and the like). What the Shibuya-kei artists did was to put
their own, specifically Japanese mark on these retro-pop genres, which in turn has
now become a distinctive style in its own right. The past decade has seen a growing
number of Shibuya-inspired projects and artists outside Japan, including the UK’s
Gentle People, France’s Dimitri From Paris and Nouvelle Vague, and in the US, The
Flaming Lips or LA retro-pop duo The Bird and The Bee. The Shibuya-kei Yahoo!
group lists, in addition to Japanese artists, several dozen ‘like-minded acts’ from
France, the US and UK, Spain, Sweden and the Netherlands. Shibuya itself has been
eulogised in songs such as Momus’s ‘Anthem of Shibuya’ (1997) or Glaswegian
indie band The Pearlfishers’ exquisitely titled ‘The Umbrellas of Shibuya’ (2007), and
there is even a UK indie band called Shibuya Crossings. In the US, retro-pop duo
The Bird and The Bee’s song ‘Love Letter to Japan’ (2009) is an homage to J-pop
more generally. South Korean bands Clazziquai Project, Casker, and Humming
Urban Stereo are often seen as representing a Korean neo-Shibuya-kei movement.10
Spanish indie band La Casa Azul and Argentina’s Modular have both produced
neo-Shibuya-kei albums, while La Casa Azul’s first Japanese release, a compilation
called Cerca de Shibuya (2011), offers Japanese record collectors the interesting experience of acquiring a Spanish Shibuya-kei CD at Tower Records Shibuya itself.
Neither imitations of nor references to Shibuya-kei, this growing catalogue of examples
can be seen as contributions to the continuing development of Shibuya-kei as transnational audiotopia. Moreover, Japanese Shibuya-kei artists are still actively involved in
collaborative projects with non-Japanese musicians around the globe, ensuring that the
style continues to follow new and intriguing itineraries in the present.

Belo Horizonte – Tokyo
Along with French and British pop, bossa nova is one of the signature styles of the
Shibuya-kei sound. Originating in Rio in the late 1950s and early 1960s, after initial
success in the US it quickly globalised and bands such as Sergio Mendes’s Brazil ’66
became staples of easy-listening music around the globe, inspiring numerous

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

118

Martin Roberts

European and other imitators.11 Bossa nova has long held a special place in Japan, in
part because of the historical links between Brazil and Japan through migration (de
Carvalho 2002; Masterson 2003; Maeda 2007). Brazilian musicians such as Nara Leão
(Cabral 2009) enjoy a cult following there, bossa nova bars with names like
Barquinho abound and, as the recent documentary Bossa Nova Sol Nascente (2010)
attests, a substantial body of bossa nova music has been produced by
Japanese-Brazilian as well as Japanese musicians (see also Tartan 2006). It was perhaps inevitable, then, that bossa nova would be part of the Shibuya-kei repertoire,
and that Shibuya-kei would find a receptive audience in Brazil, particularly among
producers of the increasingly ubiquitous compilations of bossa-based club music
such as Bossacucanova.
One of the more interesting encounters is the recent collaboration between
Nomiya Maki, formerly of Pizzicato Five, and Fernanda Takai, a Brazilian of
Japanese descent and lead singer of indie band Pato Fu. Although Takai’s grandmother is Japanese, she reportedly only began studying Japanese as an adult
(Mikevis 2008), though she clearly has a longer familiarity with Shibuya-kei: Pato
Fu’s 1999 EP Isopor includes a Shibuya-kei pastiche titled ‘Made in Japan’,12 while
the band’s 2010 album Música de Brinquedo includes a cover of the Pizzicato Five
song ‘Twiggy Twiggy’ performed in Japanese by Takai. The Maki-Takai collaboration began with a joint performance of some Pizzicato Five songs in Belo
Horizonte, Brazil, and during Pato Fu’s subsequent Japanese tour in 2008. This
was followed by the neo-Shibuya-kei EP Maki-Takai: No Jetlag (2009), with each singer
performing both in Japanese and Portuguese, and including a Shibuya-esque cover of
Roberto Menescal’s bossa nova standard ‘O Barquinho’ sung in Japanese.13 The duo
have since performed together again at a series of 2011 concerts at the Festival de
Cinema Japonês in São Paolo.14 I mention this encounter not because it is particularly
unusual – on the contrary, such encounters between like-minded musicians are an
everyday occurrence in today’s global music industry – but because it exemplifies
both the transnational reach of Shibuya-kei today, and the genre’s continuing evolution in an ongoing, transcultural dialogue with other musicians and musics around
the globe. Given its own globalisation over the past decade the question remains as to
whether Shibuya-kei can now be considered as a style of ‘world music’, albeit one
which challenges that term’s received definition.

Saudade do Futuro
Mono no aware / The sadness of things
Mono no aware / The temptation to see / The world as it ought to be
Mono no aware / The sadness of things
Blinded with tears I can still see
My insignificance in an indifferent universe
—Momus, ‘The Sadness of Things’ (1995)

I will conclude with some thoughts about affect, as it is one of the most distinctive
aspects of Shibuya-kei and offers a way of talking about the music in terms beyond
music-industry economics or transnational flows. In contrast to the darkness, alienation and rage that characterise much contemporary popular music, Shibuya-kei
music tends toward a sunnier disposition. In this respect it resembles some of its
sources, most notably the perennially cheerful indie-pop of él Records (and it

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei

119

comes as little surprise that Louis Philippe’s website is named ‘Sunshine’). It has been
suggested that the sunniness of Shibuya-kei reflects the economic optimism of the
late 1980s and early 1990s, before the end of the bubble economy, when consumer
spending was still high, especially among Japanese youth. Shibuya-kei songs reflect
the affluent, cosmopolitan lifestyles of the artists who produced them, focusing on
leisure and play rather than the world of work: shopping, nightlife, watching movies,
fashion, favourite sports players, hanging out with friends in coffee-shops, partying,
being in love. They are utopian in the same way that commodity culture more generally is utopian, projecting a world of better living through consumption of the
‘right’ items. It is, of course, all too easy to dismiss such musics as merely frivolous
and superficial, in contrast to the high seriousness of angrier musics; fortunately, the
picture is more complex than this. Here él Records again provides a useful prototype:
while the almost cloying sweetness of some of Louis Philippe’s songs, for example,
may not be to everyone’s taste, they do prove on closer examination to be more bittersweet or wistful rather than just naïvely happy. Shibuya-kei could be said to be
characterised by a similar emotional ambivalence, with happiness always tinged
with sadness, loss and nostalgia. While the word ‘happy’ may seem to occur like a
mantra in Pizzicato Five songs, for example, it is noteworthy how often it is juxtaposed with an opposite or countervailing term: ‘Happy Sad’ is the most obvious
example, but the title of the band’s 1997 album Happy End of the World strikes a similarly dissonant note (while also, in a classic piece of overdetermination, referencing
Hosono Haruomi’s 1970s pre-Yellow Magic Orchestra band Happy End).
In discussions of Brazilian music, the concept of saudade is often cited as defining both the essence and the uniqueness of that music, especially in genres such as
bossa nova.15 Saudade is often referenced explicitly in bossa nova in songs such as
‘Chega de Saudade,’ and given Shibuya-kei’s love of bossa nova it is hardly surprising that it is also referenced there, for instance in the Fantastic Plastic Machine song
‘Pura Saudade.’ The happy-sad ambivalence mentioned above could also be seen as
close to the affective register of saudade. But what could such yearning be for? I would
suggest that it is closely related to the nostalgia of Shibuya-kei musicians for the
1960s and the popular music of that period, and could be characterised more specifically by the Portuguese notion of saudade do futuro (best translated as ‘nostalgia for
the future’). Much of the charm of 1950s and 1960s popular music genres such as
easy listening, or what postmodern listeners of the 1990s started to call ‘space-age
bachelor pad music’, arguably lay in its naive optimism about the future, and its
cult of modern design and technology – whether in the home or in space – as the
basis for human progress.16 Nowhere is this technological utopianism more evident
than in the domain of music production and consumption, with the advent of
‘hi-fidelity’ recordings, stereophonic record players, and with them the rise of a
new genre of recordings designed to demonstrate their new features. Such records
are the origin of the ‘new stereophonic sound spectacular’ sample which recurs in
various Pizzicato Five songs, and serves as an auditory symbol of the technofuturism of its time.17 Pizzicato Five’s artwork is pervaded by such
nostalgia-for-the-future imagery, from ultra-modern lounges to Nomiya Maki posing
in a space suit for the cover of a remix compilation. This fantasy of an ultra-modern
future, promised by many world fairs over the past century, had become an object of
ironic nostalgia by the 1990s, for a postmodern generation now living in the much
less rosy future. Pizzicato Five’s saudade do futuro, like that of similar retro-futuristic
bands such as Stereolab or the Gentle People, yearns nostalgically for the future as

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

120

Martin Roberts

the 1960s imagined it, the future of space-age bachelor pads and supersonic air travel,
of moon landings and Barbarella.
The concept of saudade itself, while difficult to translate and often claimed to be
a uniquely Brazilian affect, nevertheless has some similarities to the Japanese
expression mono no aware, often translated as ‘the pathos of things’, which refers to
the awareness of the transience of everything and the gentle sadness or wistfulness
this brings:18 and of course, Momus has a song about it, ‘The Sadness of Things’
(1995), written in the midst of his collaborations with Shibuya-kei artists.
Happy-Sad, saudade, mono no aware: All Things Must Pass, as George Harrison
might have put it.
Which brings us, appropriately, to Konishi Yasuharu’s latest post-Pizzicato Five
project. Released on 25 May 2011, the date of the 10th anniversary of the band’s official dissolution, under the melancholy name of Pizzicato One, its cover depicts a
black-clad, snow-covered Konishi standing stiffly alone in a wintry landscape, and
is described as a collection of ‘very sad’ cover songs (Universal Music 2011).
‘Gathered from around the world regardless of genre’, arranged by Konishi but
sung in English by different singers, it includes a cover of perhaps the definitive statement of musical utopianism: John Lennon’s ‘Imagine’. Among several Brazilian
songs, one is a spoken-word performance by bossa legend Marcos Valle of his classic,
‘Preciso Aprender a Ser Só’ (‘I need to learn to be alone’, 1965), in a new translation
which accentuates the saudade of the Portuguese original.19 One could scarcely wish
for a more succinct encapsulation of the Shibuya-kei ethos of connoisseurship, internationalism, utopianism and bittersweet memory. Saudade/mono no aware becomes
self-reflexive here, a nostalgia for its own passing. While the release of the album
in the aftermath of the Tōhoku earthquake and in the midst of Japan’s nuclear crisis
was no doubt coincidental, its melancholy evocation of the transience of things suddenly became a metaphor for the national mood more generally. In post-311 Japan,
its mono no aware seems as in tune with its time as the music of Pizzicato Five was in
the heady days of the bubble economy.

Endnotes
1. From this perspective, the popularity of
Shibuya-kei among Euro-American youth can
be seen as at least partially narcissistic, the familiar colonialist pleasure of recognising the selfrefracted in the mimicry of the other. Only on
rare occasions has the equation been reversed,
as in Hosono Haruomi’s extraordinary pastiches
of Western orientalist musics in his persona as
Harry ‘The Crown’ Hosono (Hosokawa 1999).
2. John Connell and Chris Gibson use the term
‘transnational soundscapes’ in Sound Tracks
(2003) (‘A world of flows: music, mobility and
transnational soundscapes’), in connection to
the musics of postcolonial diasporas such as
South Asian bhangra or Algerian raï.
Shibuya-kei is very different to both of these
musics, not only stylistically but also because its
producers do not belong exclusively to one ethnic
group or national community. While some of
Shibuya-kei’s leading participants have been
Japanese musicians living outside of Japan in

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

cities such as Paris or New York, as well as
Japanese Koreans and Brazilians, whether they
collectively constitute a diaspora – a term more
frequently used for political communities and
musics such as reggae – is debatable.
3. The series of articles on Shibuya-kei, published by
American musician and cultural critic W. David
Marx on his Néomarxisme blog in 2004 (now the
excellent online journal Néojaponisme), provides
the most comprehensive and insightful
English-language account to date of its history
and legacy. I am indebted to it in what follows,
and readers are encouraged to consult it for a
more detailed account than I have space for
here. David Marx is emerging as one of the
most well informed and insightful critics of contemporary Japanese popular culture; see in particular his five-part series of Néojaponisme
articles, ‘The Great Shift in Japanese Pop Culture’
(Marx 2011). I have two main problems with
Marx’s take on the subject, however. The first is

IP address: 27.24.158.151

‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei
his readiness to declare Shibuya-kei as having run
its course and be therefore ‘over’, solely on the
basis of it having become part of the musical mainstream; the second, more closely related to my
argument here, is that his discussion of
Shibuya-kei is limited almost entirely to the local,
national context of its place within the Japanese
music industry at the expense of its transnational
dimension, which I seek here to foreground.
4. The suffix kei – meaning ‘system’ or more accurately in this context, ‘style’ – is used in
Japanese to identify music genres, with recent
examples including Visual-kei and Akiba-kei.
5. On the internationalism movement in 1980s
Japan, see Yoshimoto (1989).
6. Reynolds (2011) offers a critique of the relentless
advance of ‘retromania’ into Western popular culture since the 1980s, which he argues has become
a barrier to musical innovation. Reynolds includes
a chapter on Shibuya-kei and J-pop generally as
anticipating more recent tendencies in Western
pop, even going so far as to depict retromania
as a process of ‘Turning Japanese’ (Reynolds
2011, pp. 162–79). The characterisation of retro
as a ‘virus’ (pp. 171f.) contaminating the West,
the orientalist trope of Japan as ‘the empire of
retro’ (p. 162), and the notion that retromania
involves a process of Japanisation evokes what
Morley and Robbins (1995) call the ‘Japan Panic’
which has a long history in Western cultural representations of Japan. My argument throughout
this paper is more the opposite, namely that
Shibuya-kei artists’ cult of retro was symptomatic
of the larger aesthetic shifts usually referred to as
postmodernism within Western culture in general
and popular music in particular, notably the waning authority of the original and the valorising of
retro styles and pastiche; rather than the West
‘turning Japanese’, J-pop’s retromania is arguably
more symptomatic of what might be called, paraphrasing Arjun Appadurai, postmodernity at
large.
7. On the history of él Records, see Vincentelli, n.d.
8. Parts of the tour were reportedly filmed on a
Super-8 camera by the British avant-garde filmmaker Derek Jarman, a friend of Simon
Fisher-Turner who accompanied the group. The
film has never been released, and Alway and

121

Ian McNay of Cherry Records speculate that it is
probably still lying around under a bed in
Fisher-Turner’s house (McNay n.d.).
9. For details, see http://www.towatei.com/past/.
10. My special thanks go to Hyunjoon Shin for sharing information about the impact of Shibuya-kei
on current developments in Korean indie music.
11. On bossa nova, see Treece (1997), McGowan and
Pessanha (1998, chapter 3) and Castro (2001). On
bossa nova’s globalisation, see Keightley (2011).
12. The music video is available on YouTube at: http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=xDEpGk5GJ0I
(accessed 12 December 2012).
13. Takai also performs the Japanese version of
‘Kobune’ solo on her live CD/DVD Luz Negra
(2009).
14. For dates and locations of shows, see the concert
agenda listed on Fernanda Takai’s blog at http://
fernandatakai.com.br/agenda/.
15. ‘In general terms, saudade is the Portuguese word
used to describe a profound, bittersweet nostalgia
for a person, place, time or other memory from
which one has been separated’ (Draper 2010: 2).
16. I am referring to the future here as a historical
object of representation rather than the ‘actual’
future. See Carey (1989) and Rosenberg and
Harding (2006).
17. Belgian trip-hop band Hooverphonic’s 1996 album
A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular is evidently
inspired by the same sample, which is taken from
the stereo test record Stereo Sound Spectacular.
18. In contemporary Japanese culture, Haruki
Murakami’s novel Norwegian Wood (1987) and
Takahata Isao’s anime film Only Yesterday (1991)
provide good examples of the wistful awareness
of transience implied by the term mono no
aware. How far it can also be applied to the sensibility of Shibuya-kei is something I leave the
reader to consider.
19. ‘Ah I wish I could make you understand / without
your love I cannot live / without us being together I
am left alone / I feel so lonely / and I need to learn
to sleep alone / without feeling your love / and to
realise that it was just a passing dream.’ The title of
the English-language version of the song is ‘If You
Went Away’ and, as Valle explains during his performance on Konishi’s album, its lyrics are different
from those of the Brazilian original.

References
Bell, C. 1999. ‘Warner Bros. Positions Cibo Matto to Break Its “Stereotype”’, Billboard, 1 May, p. 13
Bossa Nova Sol Nascente [Bossa Nova in Japan]. 2010. Dir. Alé Braga. Film, Canada
Cabral, S. 2009. Nara Leão: Uma Biografia (Tokyo, P-Vine Books)
Carey, J.W. 1989. ‘Histories of the future’, in Communication As Culture (London, Unwin Hyman)
Castro, R. 2001. Bossa Nova: The Story of the Brazilian Music That Seduced the World (Chicago, A Cappella Books)
Connell, J., and Gibson, C. 2003. Sound Tracks: Popular Music, Identity and Place (London and New York,
Routledge)
Currie, N. 1998. ‘Shibuya-kei is dead’, Glasgow Herald online. http://imomus.com/jpop.html (accessed 26 April
2010)
Currie, N. 2008. ‘An evening with Momus’, Click Opera: An Evening With Momus (blog), 17 July. http://imomus.
livejournal.com/387272.html (accessed 26 April 2010)
de Carvalho, D. 2002. Migrants and Identity in Japan and Brazil (New York, Routledge)

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

122

Martin Roberts

Draper, J.A. 2010. Forró and Redemptive Regionalism from the Brazilian Northeast: Popular Music as a Culture of
Migration. New York, Peter Lang Publishing Inc.
Hayward P. (ed.) 1999. Widening the Horizon: Exoticism in Post-War Popular Music (Sydney, Perfect Beat
Publications)
Hosokawa, S. 1999. ‘Soy sauce music: Haruomi Hosono and Japanese self-Orientalism’, in Widening the
Horizon: Exoticism in Post-War Popular Music, ed. P. Hayward (Sydney, Perfect Beat Publications), pp.
114–44
Keightley, K. 2011. ‘“Un Voyage” via “Barquinho” . . . global circulation, musical hybridization, and adult modernity, 1961–69’, in Migrating Music, ed. J. Toynbee and B. Dueck (New York, Routledge), pp. 112–26
Kun, J. 2005. Audiotopia: Music, Race, and America (Berkeley, University of California Press)
LN-CC. n.d. ‘Interview: Kenji Takimi’, LN-CC website. http://www.ln-cc.com/interviews/kenji-interview/page/
kenji-interview/ (accessed 30 June 2010)
Maeda, H. 2007. Japanese Brazilians in Japan (Saarbrücken, VDM Verlag)
Marx, W.D. 2004. ‘The legacy of Shibuya-kei’ (6 parts), Néojaponisme website, 15–24 November. http://neojaponisme.com/category/neomarxisme-archive/music-neomarxisme-archive/the-legacy-of-shibuya-kei/
(accessed 26 April 2010)
Marx, W.D. 2010. ‘R.I.P. Shibuya HMV’, Néojaponisme website, 25 August. http://neojaponisme.com/2010/08/
25/r-i-p-shibuya-hmv/ (accessed 25 May 2011)
Marx, W.D. 2011. ‘The great shift in Japanese pop culture’ (5 parts), Néojaponisme website, 28 November–2
December. http://neojaponisme.com/2011/11/28/the-great-shift-in-japanese-pop-culture-part-one/ (accessed
10 December 2011)
Masterson, D.M. 2003. The Japanese in Latin America (Chicago, University of Illinois Press)
McGowan, C., and Pessanha, R. 1998. The Brazilian Sound: Samba, Bossa Nova and the Popular Music of Brazil
(Philadelphia, Temple University Press)
McNay, I. n.d. ‘The él records story. Mike Alway interviewed by Ian McNay’, Cherry Red Records website.
http://www.cherryred.co.uk/other/cherryredtv/interviews.htm (accessed 30 June 2010)
Mikevis, D. 2008. ‘Fernanda Takai “despertou” para idioma japonês já adulta’, Folha Online, 17 January. http://
www1.folha.uol.com.br/folha/ilustrada/ult90u364469.shtml (accessed 2 December 2011)
Morley, D., and Robbins, K. 1995. ‘Techno-Orientalism: Japan panic’, in Spaces of Identity: Global Media,
Electronic Landscapes and Cultural Boundaries (London, Routledge), pp. 147–73
Reynolds, S. 2011. ‘Turning Japanese: the empire of retro and the hipster international’, in Retromania: Pop
Culture’s Addiction to Its Own Past (London, Faber & Faber), pp. 162–79
Rosenberg D., and Harding S. (eds.) 2006. Histories of the Future (Durham, Duke University Press)
Sunshine: the Louis Philippe website. http://www.louisphilippe.co.uk/ (accessed 13 August 2011)
Svenonius, I. n.d. ‘An interview with Mike Alway: the man behind the myths’, BB Gun Magazine online. http://
www.bbgun.org/text/alway.htm (accessed 30 June 2010)
Tartan, S. 2006. ‘Bossa nova forever young’, Japan Times Online, 15 September. http://www.japantimes.co.jp/
text/fm20060915a1.html (accessed 26 April 2010)
Treece, D. 1997. ‘Guns and Roses: Bossa nova and Brazil’s music of popular protest, 1958–1968’, Popular Music,
16/1, pp. 1–29
Universal Music. 2011. Konishi Yasuharu is Pizzicato One: One and Ten Very Sad Songs. http://www.universalmusic.co.jp/jazz/j_jazz/pizzicato_one/ (accessed 2 December 2011)
Vincentelli, E. n.d. ‘A user’s guide to él Records’, emusic website. http://www.emusic.com/features/spotlight/
293_200708-ug-el-records.html (accessed 30 June 2010)
Yoshimoto, M. 1989. ‘The postmodern and mass images in Japan’, Public Culture, 1/2, pp. 8–25

Discography
Cibo Matto. Viva! La Woman. LP. Warner Bros. Records 9 45989-1, 1996.
Cornelius (Oyamada Keigo). Fantasma. LP. Trattoria, Polystar Menu.139, PSJR-9121, 1997.
Cornelius (Oyamada Keigo). Point. LP. Trattoria, Polystar Menu.243, PSJR-9139, 2001.
Fantastic Plastic Machine (Tanaka Tomoyuki). The Fantastic Plastic Machine. LP. Nippon Columbia TDJL-91405,
1997.
Fernanda Takai. Luz Negra—Fernanda Takai Ao Vivo. CD. Deckdisc 33039-2, 2009.
Fernanda Takai and Nomiya Maki. Maki-Takai: No Jetlag. CD. Taiyo Record 0013, 2009.
Hooverphonic. A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular. LP. Columbia 484389 1, 1996.
Kahimi Karie and the Crue-L Grand Orchestra. Mike Alway’s Diary. CD, EP. Crue-L Records KYTHMAK 003D,
1992.
La Casa Azul. El Sonido Efervescente de La Casa Azul. CD, EP. Elefant Records ER-1076, 2000.
Marcos Valle. O Compositor e o Cantor. LP. Odeon Fonográfica MOFB 3413, 1965.
Modular. Fantasías de un Robot Psichedélico. CD. Elefant Records ER-1138, 2009.
Momus (Nick Currie). The Philosophy of Momus. CD. Cherry Red CD BRED 119, 1995.
Momus (Nick Currie). Ping Pong. CD. Bungalow Records BUNG 031, 1997.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

‘A new stereophonic sound spectacular’: Shibuya-kei

123

Nomoto Karia. Karly. CD. Readymade International RMCA-1014, 2004.
Nomoto Karia. Dance Music. Columbia, Readymade COCP-50956, 2007.
Pato Fu. Isopor. CD. BMG Brasil 7432169638-2, 1999.
Pato Fu. Música de Brinquedo. CD. Rotomusic, 2010.
The Pearlfishers. Up With The Larks. CD. Marina Records MA 69, 2007.
Pizzicato One. One and Ten Very Sad Songs. CD. Universal Music UCCU-1320, 2010.
Sweet Jam Style. Shibuyakei Bossa. CD. blowgrow UCCU-1320, 2010.
The Bird and the Bee. Ray Guns Are Not Just The Future. LP. Blue Note Records 50999 2 34556 10, 2009.
The Flaming Lips. Yoshimi Battles the Pink Robots. LP. Warner Bros. Records 530200-1, 2002.
Towa Tei. Future Listening! LP. Güt, For Life Records FLJG-9002, 1994.
Towa Tei. Sound Museum. LP. EastWest Japan MFJP-1008, 1997.
Towa Tei. Last Century Modern. LP. Akashic Records 028, 1999.
Various Artists. All About Mike Alway. CD. Rambling Records RBCS-2075, 2004.
Various Artists. Attractions! Konishi Yasuharu Remixes 1996-2010. CD. Readymade V.I.C. VICL-63415, 2010.
Various Artists. Fab Gear. CD. Polystar PSCR-1016, 1991.
Various Artists. Songs for the Jet Set. CD. Él Records ACME 29CD, 1997.
Various Artists. Songs for the Jet Set Volume 2. CD. Jetset Records TWA16CD, 1999.
Various Artists. Songs for the Jet Set Volume 3. CD. Jetset Records TWA26CD, 2000.
Various Artists. Stereo Sound Spectacular. LP. Coronet Records CXS 176, 1962(?).
Various Artists. Sushi 3003: A Spectacular Collection of Japanese Clubpop. LP. Bungalow Records BUNG 006, 1996.
Various Artists. Sushi 4004: The Return of Spectacular Japanese Clubpop. LP. Bungalow Records BUNG 036-1,
1998.

Filmography
Bossa Nova Sol Nascente [Bossa Nova in Japan]. Canada. 2010. Dir. Alé Braga.

http://journals.cambridge.org
View publication stats

Downloaded: 11 Dec 2013

IP address: 27.24.158.151

